Support runtime programmatic set up for basic and form-based authentication using fluent API (#48659)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-authentication-mechanisms.adoc

        throw new UnauthorizedException("Not authenticated");
    }
    FormAuthenticationMechanism.logout(identity); <1>
    return Response.noContent().build();
}
----
<1> Perform the logout by removing the session cookie.

[[form-configuration-properties]]
==== Form-based authentication configuration reference

The following properties can be used to configure form-based authentication:

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http_quarkus.http.auth.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

[[form-based-auth-programmatic-set-up]]
==== Set up Form-based authentication programmatically

In addition to the configuration properties listed in the <<form-configuration-properties>> section, Quarkus supports a programmatic set up during the runtime as in the example below:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.http.security;

import io.quarkus.vertx.http.security.event.Form;
import jakarta.enterprise.event.Observes;

public class FormConfiguration {

    void configure(@Observes Form form) { <1>
        form
                .enable()
                .httpOnlyCookie()
                .loginPage("/my-login.html")
                .errorPage("/my-error.html");
    }

}
----

> <1> Observe the `io.quarkus.vertx.http.security.event.Form` CDI event and customize the configuration provided in the `application.properties` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Observe the `io.quarkus.vertx.http.security.event.Form` CDI event and configure Form authentication mechanism programmatically.
```

I believe the main idea is not to deal with application.properties

Author: well, I'll apply your suggestion. I thought we should stress what this API can do, which in my eyes unlike the application.properties is:

- use runtime configuration to decide how security setup looks like
- customize some common config in the app properties in individual deployments

So it can do more. But what you suggest doesn't say it can't do it, so I agree.

    }
    FormAuthenticationMechanism.logout(identity); <1>
    return Response.noContent().build();
}
----
<1> Perform the logout by removing the session cookie.

[[form-configuration-properties]]
==== Form-based authentication configuration reference

The following properties can be used to configure form-based authentication:

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http_quarkus.http.auth.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

[[form-based-auth-programmatic-set-up]]
==== Set up Form-based authentication programmatically

In addition to the configuration properties listed in the <<form-configuration-properties>> section, Quarkus supports a programmatic set up during the runtime as in the example below:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.http.security;

import io.quarkus.vertx.http.security.Form;
import io.quarkus.vertx.http.security.HttpSecurity;
import jakarta.enterprise.event.Observes;

public class FormConfiguration {

    void configure(@Observes HttpSecurity httpSecurity) {   <1>
        var builder = Form.builder().httpOnlyCookie().loginPage("/my-login.html").errorPage("/my-error.html");
        httpSecurity

>                 .mechanism(builder.build())

Author: Thanks Sergey.

> I believe we should also have, in this case, another option, httpSecurity.mechanism(builder.build()).

That is completely same as what is in the example, can you elaborate what you mean, please?

> When we have @Authenticated, is httpSecurity.mechanism(builder.build()) enough ?

Yes, it is. I know there are not tests (because 1. all changes are in Vert.X HTTP extensions so I added all the tests there and 2. there is no space for doubt it in my mind). I could add some if you have doubts.

FYI you can also do `httpSecurity.mechanism(new AnyHttpAuthenticationMechanism());`

>                 .path("/custom-config/*").form(builder.loginPage("/custom-login.html").build());  <2>

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Michal, if we retain right now path based creation of form or basic or ant other custom mechanisms, with `authenticatedWith` then the API becomes non-minimalistic, and quite ambiguous - one can do `httpMechanism.mechanism()`, the duplicate it with `.paths()....authenticatedWith()`, and users may have to do it multiple times, `authenticatedWith()`, if different paths have different authorization policies but the same mechanism, and we haven't even had a single user requirement for basic or form to support it. 
IMHO this is a mechanism specific multi-tenancy concern how to handle such cases. 

`httpMechanism.mechanism()` that you propose for basic for now is a much better start IMHO, it is a single anchor, and a given registered mechanism can be referred to from various places where it is needed

>                 .path("/custom-config/*").authenticatedWith(builder.loginPage("/custom-login.html").build());  <2>

Author: But `authenticatedWith` has nothing to do with this PR, it is already implemented and this "flexibility" you are referring to is just analogy to "quarkus.http.auth.permission."permissions".auth-mechanism=custom-mechanism`. personally I think doing `httpSecurity.path("my").authenticatedWith(new CustomAuthMech())` than defining transport credentials and globally regisgtering a mechanism.

Honestly, this is much simpler doing it programmatically and it is not a "new concept", it is just a programmatic way of doing things.

Would you settle on removing documentation examples and keeping it there? I have hard time removing something that already works on main and I was very happy it got in.

>                 .path("/custom-config/*").authenticatedWith(builder.loginPage("/custom-login.html").build());  <2>

Reviewer: @michalvavrik 

>"quarkus.http.auth.permission."permissions".auth-mechanism=custom-mechanism

It is not the same at all as `httpSecurity.path("my").authenticatedWith(new CustomAuthMech())` unfortunately.
The above refers to the custom mechanism implementation registered once and referred to from various places.

>personally I think doing httpSecurity.path("my").authenticatedWith(new CustomAuthMech()) is much easier to understand than defining transport credentials and globally registering a mechanism.

Hmm... I did not realize that it bypasses the way the mechanisms are linked to... I'm getting confused now.
What exactly is `CustomAuthMech()` that allows it to be used without it being a registered mechanism ?

    }

}
----
<1> Observe the `io.quarkus.vertx.http.security.HttpSecurity` CDI event and configure Form authentication mechanism programmatically.

> <2> Configure the `/custom-login.html` login page only for requests with the `/custom-config` sub-paths.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Michal, it is not about removing the documentation. I don't get what is going on

> <2> Configure the `/custom-login.html` login page only for requests with the `/custom-config` sub-paths.

Reviewer: I've had a look...

include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-vertx-http_quarkus.http.auth.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

[[form-based-auth-programmatic-set-up]]
==== Set up Form-based authentication programmatically

> In addition to the configuration properties listed above, Quarkus supports programmatic set up during the runtime as in the example below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the configuration properties listed in the <<form-configuration-properties>> section, Quarkus supports programmatic set up during the runtime as in the example below:
```

where the `form-configuration-properties` is an anchor for that section
